At Smithfield near BP fuel station and the fire station, is a road intersection controlled by traffic lights. There are four vertical lanes called Captain Cook Highway, and two horizontal lanes, Stanton Road. The traffic lights controlling the vertical lanes typically stays green for thirty seconds, then turns orange for three, and finally turns red. The lights controlling the vertical flow of traffic normally are quicker to change and only stay green for about 15 seconds or less. They also change orange for three seconds, and then red.

On average, I would estimate that about 3000 cars travel through this intersection per day, in any direction. Many cars, if not all, traveling to the JCU University and coming from smithfield or further (city) must go through these lights, and back on their return trip. There are also other attractions which make it such a busy spot such as BP fuel station, fire station, fire fighters post, nearby police station, shopping center and homes.
In the peak traffic hours between 7am-9am and 5pm-7pm there is heavy traffic congestion. I would estimate that between these peak hours (combined) an average of 1500+ cars need to commute through this intersection.

Currently as Cairns is expanding, more cars are on the roads, and time becoming more important, I would say the situation is only getting worse. On occasions when personally going through the horizontal lanes, if I am the second car in queue, when the light turns green and the car in front has gone through, by the time I am in the middle of the intersection, the lights have turned orange. This usually means that 6-7 cars may be in queue and may have to wait 2-3 light change cycles! It is understandable that the horizontal lights are on a shorter time, because Captain Cook Highway does contain a lot more traffic, however, the lights for the vertical traffic are nearly guaranteed to be green! This sort of defeats the purpose of traffic lights to evenly distribute give-way times.

This could be rectified by designing a simulation model of the intersection, and inputting real world data to analyze the situation. Traffic flow analysts could observe the simulation, alter the parameters, and be able to study a brand-new traffic lights system!